<<<PAGE 4>>>
[PART II-—SEC. 3(ii)]
THEGAZETTEOFINDIA:EXTRAORDINARY
4
MINISTRY OF CONSUMERAFFAIRS,FOODANDPUBLICDISTRIBUTION
Department of Consumer Affairs)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi,the19th March,2014
S.O.824（E).In exercise of the powers conferred by rule 3,rule 4and rule 5 of the Legal
Metrology（Approval of Models)Rules,2011,theDirector(Legal Metrology)herebynotifies and authorises the
principal officersof therecognized Laboratories toreceive the applicationsfrom themanufacturers ofweights
andmeasuresof theirregions directly for testing ofmodels for which the facility is availablewith that
laboratory.
2. The format of application for making an application for approval of model shall be as specified in the First
Format annexed hereto.
3. The format of application for making an application to the Director for recognition under these rules for
carrying out tests for the approval of the model of any weight or measure under sub-rule (1) of rule 4 of the
said rules shall be as specified in the Second Format annexed hereto.
4. This notification shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
[F. No. WM-9(4)/2014]
MANOJ KUMAR PARIDA, Jt. Secy.
First Format
[See para 2]
Application for Approval of Model
(To be submitted in duplicate)
1 (a) Full name and address of the applicant (where the applicant is not resident of India, specify the name and
address of his representative in India)
(b) A brief description of the weight or measure, the class to which it belongs and the probable use for which the
weight or measure is intended to be produced.
(c) Data regarding metrological and technical characteristics and qualities of the weight or measure.
(d) Test procedure followed by the manufacturer.
(e) Trade name or type of the weight or measure.
(f) If the weight or measure is provided with supplementary or additional devices, full information with regard to
such supplementary or additional devices, such as drawing, descriptions in relation to the said weight or
measures.
2. Application shall be accompanied with two copies of the following; namely:--
(a) A sketch and section wise drawing of general arrangements and installation of such weight or measure
including the details of construction of the weight or measure in such manner so as to enable the visualisation of
the weight or measure in the finished form.
(b) Document describing the following, namely:-
(i) the principles of construction and the method of operation of the weight or measure:
(ii) the safety devices provided to prevent any fraudulent or inaccurate operation of the weight or measure:
(i) the manner in which and the extent to which the weight or measure may be adjusted or corrected:
(iv) the place where the verification stamp or seal of both may be affixed:
wherenecessary
<<<PAGE 5>>>
：
[ I1-g 3(i)]
(vi) Photographs for publication along with the approval of model:
(vii) Any other informiation, which the applicant may consider to be useful for assessing the performance and
facilitating the approval of the model.
Signature of applicant
Note: The expression 'weight or measure’ includes a weighing or measuring instrument.
Note: The application in duplicate with all the technical particulars and circuit diagram (if applicable) as given
below shall be sent to the Director, Legal Metrology, 461A, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001 or to the
respective Regional Reference Standards laboratories for testing:
Operating manual in English:
Circuit diagram of each printed circuit board:
Wiring diagram:
Instruction manual in the English language:
Calibration procedure in the English language:
Components layout of each printed circuit board and the matching parts lists:
Block diagram of the software:
Mechanical diagram (exploded views of all types):
A list with all applied interfaces:
A drawing with location where and how the instrument can be secured against dismantling and calibration
by the user:
Specifications of all possible devices.
Second Format
[See para 3]
Application for Recognition of Laboratory under the Legal Metrology
(Approval of Models) Rules, 2011
hereby make application to the Director, Legal
 on behalf of .
IWe....
Metrology, Government of India under Rule 4 of the Legal Metrology (Approval of Models) Rules, 2011 for
granting recognition to this laboratory for carrying out of model approval test in the following field.
...hereby undertake to comply with the Legal Metrology (Approval of Models) Rules,
IWe .........
2011 as in force for the time being.
....hereby agree to abide by the terms and conditions that may be specified by the
I/We
Director, Legal Metrology in this behalf.
..hereby declare that the particulars of my/our laboratory given below are correct.
IWe.....
Signature.....
Date..
<<<PAGE 6>>>
[PART II-SEC. 3(ii)]
THEGAZETTEOFINDIA:EXTRAORDINARY
6
PARTICULARS OFLABORATORY
Moder of Weight orMeastire for which
Field of use
Equipment
application is made
Sr.No.
f,19,2014
<<<PAGE 7>>>
13（]
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 19th March, 2014
S.O. 825(E).-In exercise of the powers conferred by rule 3 of the Legal Metrology (Approval of
Models) Rules, 2011, the Director (Legal Metrology) hereby recognizes and notifies the laboratories specified in
column (2) of the Table as the Laboratories for testing the models of Weights and Measures specified in column
(3) of the said Table, namely:--
TABLE
(3)
(2)
Models of Weights and Measures
(1)
Laboratories
(i)Mechanical andelectronicweighing instruments
SI.No.
Regional Reference Standards Laboratory,
likeNon-Automatic weighing instruments,
1.
(i)Automatic GravimetricFillingInstrument,
Ahmadabad,
Regional Reference Standards Laboratory,
(ii) Counter Machine,
2.
(iv) Fuel dispensing pumps,
Bangalore,
Regional Reference Standards Laboratory,
(v) Measuring tapes,
3.
(vi)  Volumetric capacity measures of  higher
Bhubaneswar,
Regional Reference Standards Laboratory,
capacities,
4.
(vii) Auto rickshaw and taxi meters,
Faridabad
(viii) Clinical thermometers,
Regional Reference Standards Laboratory,
5.
(ix) Sphygmomanometers (B P Meters)
Guwahati
(x) Liquor measures
(Xi) Any other Weight or Measure, forwarded by
Director,Legal Metroiogy.
2. (1) The Laboratories referred to in column (2) of the said Table shall conduct the testing in accordance with the
provisions of the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 (1 of 2010) and the rules made thereunder.
(2) The Laboratories shall also follow the technical recommendation of the International Organization of Legal
Metrology regarding format and check list and comply with the provisions of International Organisation for
Standardisation or International Electrotechnical Committee 17025.
3. The Head of Office recognised by the Department shall be construed as the ‘Principal Officer' of the Laboratory.
[F. No. WM-9(4)/2014]
MANOJ KUMAR PARIDA, Jt. Secy.
